---
layout: post
title: 5 Takeaways from the Ashley Madison Hack
date: 2015-09-19 00:35:45.000000000 -04:00
---
In light of yet another cyberattack, this time on the risque “dating” site Ashley Madison, we are reminded again of the fact that cybersecurity is a hot-button issue in need of rectification. While the morality of Ashley Madison--a site that brazenly totes the slogan “Life is short. Have an affair,” is undoubtedly subject to criticism, it is imperative that the public looks past the “simultaneously brilliant and despicable”[1] adultery-facilitator and sees this hack for what it is, yet another flagrant warning that cybersecurity is a top priority in an increasingly cyber world, and that any of us could end up “a pawn in some hacker’s moral outrage-driven extortion attack.”[2] Hopefully the scandalous appeal of Ashley Madison brings the necessary media attention to this issue in order for people recognize the following key points

**1. Any Organization Could Be a Target**

While people may be under the impression that hackers often operate with monetary motives, the attack on Ashley Madison is indicative that there’s often much more behind a hacking than the pursuit of a hefty payday. They were the victims of a moral outrage-motivated hack, where money wasn’t even in the picture. While it is easy to see why people would be morally outraged with a site that all but encourages infidelity, the fact of the matter is that any organization within the private or public sector could be a victim of a moral-outrage motivated attack.

Sites like Ashley Madison are obvious targets: they hold a motherlode of very embarrassing and very private information that users shared under the pretense of anonymity and faith in the security of the website. However, while not all of us are adulterers, each and every one of us is guilty of doing something online that could be potentially embarrassing or incriminating, and the places where this information is stored may not be as safe as we think.

Even the most ordinary, safest, and seemingly unthreatened organizations could still be targeted. There are innumerable potential motives for some individual or group of hackers to see something morally wrong about a company, and with cyberattacks occurring at a shocking rate, this can’t go unacknowledged.

Organizations who may think they don’t have much to offer a hacker money-wise, could hold information of even greater value to a hacker than money could ever be. Ransoms demanded out of moral outrage are entirely different than the prototypical “pay me x amount or suffer y consequence.” As Jason Bloomberg states in his article, “a moral outrage ransom could be anything – including the cessation of your business altogether, as in the case of the Ashley Madison attack.

**2. Ashley Madison Likely Has the Edge in the Court of Public Opinion**

At first glance, Ashley Madison simply doesn’t look good. They’re a risque site to begin with, and they couldn’t even protect their dubious clientele. In addition, the group of hackers going by the name The Impact Team has taken a page out of the infamous hacking group known as Anonymous’s playbook by portraying Ashley Madison as a website frequented by the elite, and have forewarned that if their demands are not met, “...a significant percentage of the population is about to have a very bad day, including many rich and powerful people.”[3] The fact that over a quarter of married Ottawanians have an Ashley Madison membership practically writes the ‘out-of-touch politicians using your tax dollars to cheat on their spouses’ headline for them. And the populist message usually garners public support.

The problem for The Impact Team is that their efforts to frame this ordeal as the righteous majority exposing the corrupt minority (given an easy-access outlet by Ashley Madison) doesn’t align with the numbers--both in regards to how many people commit adultery and how the public looks upon adultery in general. Numerous surveys suggest the North American rate of infidelity hovers around 20% (and this number is likely conservative given that people aren’t exactly lining up to profess they are unfaithful to their significant other).[4] So immediately at least 1 in 5 people are able to put themselves in the shoes of Ashley Madison users, and all but certainly join in solidarity with the users who may have their personal lives exposed before the world.

Furthermore, as social conventions continue to liberalize, greater numbers of the population are going to refrain from deeming adultery as morally reprehensible as The Impact Team is suggesting. “Too bad for those men, they’re cheating dirtbags…” doesn’t sound professional, and again their attempts to use populist rhetoric (rhetoric that is most successful with the disenchanted youth) to take on an issue that young Westerners generally don’t hold strong views about is ultimately paradoxical. The North American public is making it resoundingly clear that they prioritize their own privacy over the opportunity to chastise others at the scaffold for their moral shortcomings--shortcomings that often mirror their own. 

The public doesn’t like to hold grudges against unfaithful spouses either. A minority actively condone infidelity, of course, but history shows the public is willing to forgive in time when a respectable level of contrition is exhibited in the aftermath of the revelations. Former President Bill Clinton can attest as he has seen his favorability rise nearly 30% over the last decade to upwards of 70% overall, and more recently Tiger Woods has seen a 10% spike in favorability since the last Gallup poll was taken in 2013.[5] Outing cheating spouses is rarely anyone’s crusade of choice, and in light of the fact that The Impact Team has illegally hacked a website--infringing upon its civil liberties and its right to operate as a legal entity--that has always been quite candid regarding what it offers, the hackers may very well come off as the side looking worse for wear.

**3. Companies Must be Forthright with their Clientele**

While Ashley Madison may survive in the court of public opinion due to the fact that so many people have skeletons in their closet, what remains to be seen is whether existing and potential new members will trust them. And this is critical for all businesses: you have to tell your clients the truth. Simple, but essential.

At this time, it’s unclear whether Ashley Madison knew that the service it was offering its customers to completely erase their history for a $19.00 fee was in fact not erasing profile history. In the words of The Impact Team, “Full Delete [the service] netted ALM $1.7mm in revenue in 2014. It’s also a complete lie,” and “their purchase details are not removed as promised, and include real name and address.”[6] If these claims are substantiated, they’re damning for Ashley Madison: they profited richly off a service they couldn’t (or didn’t take the appropriate measures to) provide. In the words of John Laprise of the Detroit News, “We are not talking about falling short of best practices or even good practices; we are talking about implementation of worst practices like plain storage of weak passwords, using default passwords and unencrypted data storage.”[7]

None of this looks great for Ashley Madison, and The Impact Team even went so far as to gloat at the seemingly futile job it is to prevent cyberattacks. “Our one apology is to Mark Steele (Director of Security). You did everything you could, but nothing you could have done could have stopped this.” And this is perhaps what’s scariest of all. Even if Ashley Madison’s cybersecurity was as pristine as it gets in the business, the hackers are claiming nothing could’ve been done. And according to Ashley Madison CEO Noel Biderman, “It was definitely a person here that was not an employee but certainly had touched our technical services.” Thus, even keeping tabs on employees with access to sensitive data proved inadequate in stopping this breach.

In time, the record will set straight how big a role Ashley Madison played in its potentially catastrophic setback. For now, the precedent is ominous: hackers can ruin a company because it’s not morally on board--and the private lives of millions can be compromised. Even if Ashley Madison claimed to offer something they couldn’t guarantee, now would be the time to stand with the people who paid for a service in good confidence. If we can’t trust a service that claims to keep our cyber footprint anonymous, then there’s truly no where to turn. Ashley Madison members, all 37 million of them, do not deserve the injustice of being lied to nor do they deserve to be guinea pigs for the public. If the continent turns a blind eye and leaves these millions of people out to dry, it encourages similar hacktivists to infringe upon the civil liberties of more and more people and businesses alike, and everyone’s privacy runs the risk of going up in smoke.  

**4. Ashley Madison Shouldn’t be Kicked While It’s Down**

Ashley Madison has been trying to launch an IPO for years, and while it had trouble drumming up the support to go public in both the United States and Canada, the company had high hopes in taking its pursuit of an IPO to Europe, which admittedly has a “more liberal attitude toward adultery.”[8] An anonymous banker admitted to Business Insider that "Over the years, they tried to do a lot of things to try to monetize the asset," and that "investment bankers wrestled with it because it's a very, very profitable business."[9]

Despite its potential profitability, Ashley Madison had no luck going public, and as if it hadn’t faced enough difficulty due to the nature of its offered services, this recent cyberattack was enough to scare off the last of any potentially interested parties. Morals aside, Ashley Madison makes money, and should its attempts at doing an IPO ever come to fruition, it could be very successful. It boasts 37 million members and the title of the world’s second largest dating site, second only to the dating-site titan, match.com.[10] The issue at hand now, is that Ashley Madison’s claims of anonymity have been shattered by the recent hack, where the hackers claim that they’ve been able to identify users through the credit card numbers used to pay for site membership and usage. Now that the incognito appeal of Ashley Madison isn’t so certain, both users and potential investors are being deterred.

This leaves the question of whether or not this is right. Ashley Madison has faced backlash since day one, and for obvious reasons, but from strictly a business standpoint there’s money to be made through it. Rather than blacklisting Ashley Madison because of this hack and letting it crumble to failure, investment bankers could stop brushing the company aside and help salvage this “very, very profitable business” opportunity. They could provide the site with a chance to grow, a chance to improve its cybersecurity, and a chance to protect its users.

**5. Take Responsibility for Yourself as a User**

On the subject of users, we must address a basic but oft overlooked aspect of internet usage. You, as an individual, are responsible for what you put on the internet. A hypothetical Ashley Madison user who posts a lewd photograph of him/herself in a “private” thread between users needs to understand that a hacker, if properly motivated to find it, can access that photograph.

On a more relatable level, just take responsibility and be a conscientious internet user. Take simple precautions, make sure your passwords aren’t weak, and consider the strength of a website before entering in sensitive information, such as credit card numbers. These are all basic, but so easily overlooked in a world that is overly trusting of the internet.

At the end of the day, however, there is a much bigger issue at hand than our habits as internet users. This whole thing is much bigger than Ashley Madison. What it boils down to is an infringement upon our civil liberties. Ashley Madison, as morally criticizable as it is, has the right to exist and operate. If an individual or group of individuals disagrees with what Ashley Madison stands for or what they do, that doesn’t give them the right to carry out a cyberattack. If we as the public brush this hacking off and justify it based on the fact that Ashley Madison is “bad” in the eyes of many, then we’re encouraging similar hacktivists to do exactly what the Impact Team has done. Then, we’re left with the question of “where is the line?” Will Budweiser be hacked by the victims of drunk-driving accidents? Will we see a group of overweight hacktivists holding a company like Calvin Klein or Ralph Lauren for ransom because their sizes aren’t big enough and they feel personally victimized? Or will we see men carry out a cyberattack on Hooters because they feel it’s out of misandry and discrimination that they exclusively hire women as Hooters Girls? It’s a laughable question, but disturbingly feasible. We must acknowledge the question of “where is the line” by acknowledging that there’s no flexibility here. Our civil liberties are our civil liberties. Ashley Madison has done no wrong on that front, and the Impact Team is the villain in this case. It is imperative that we all recognize that Ashley Madison is being unfairly victimized, and unless we want to see other organizations—ones that perhaps aren’t as easy to condemn—in the same situation, this new trend of “hacktivism” must be addressed and brought to a halt.

[1] http://www.marketwatch.com/story/ashley-madison-ipo-plans-may-be-in-jeopardy-2015-07-20

[2] http://www.detroitnews.com/story/opinion/2015/07/25/ashley-madison-take-cybersecurity-seriously/30629841/

[3] https://krebsonsecurity.com/2015/07/online-cheating-site-ashleymadison-hacked/

[4] http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/28/health/28well.html?_r=0

[5] http://www.gallup.com/poll/1618/favorability-people-news.aspx

[6] https://krebsonsecurity.com/2015/07/online-cheating-site-ashleymadison-hacked/

[7] http://www.detroitnews.com/story/opinion/2015/07/25/ashley-madison-take-cybersecurity-seriously/30629841/

[8] http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-15/adultery-website-ashleymadison-seeks-ipo-as-demand-booms

[9] http://www.businessinsider.com/bankers-hacked-infidelity-website-ashley-madison-can-kiss-goodbye-plans-for-an-ipo-2015-7

[10] http://www.businessinsider.com/bankers-hacked-infidelity-website-ashley-madison-can-kiss-goodbye-plans-for-an-ipo-2015-7
