---
layout: post
title: Moving from Person to Machine -- The Framework of a Continuous Security Delivery
  Fabric
date: 2015-11-16 13:55:08.000000000 -05:00
---
Organizations must alter their core approach to cybersecurity that is simply outdated in this changed landscape – one that is now fraught with more frequent and vicious cyberattacks and threats from sophisticated hackers. For too long, companies have been reactionary in their cybersecurity efforts—looking for assistance long after emails have been spammed, systems have been bloated, and sensitive information has been phished. This sort of approach to cybersecurity is far too reductionist and passive in nature. It is grounded in the flawed logic that companies ought to seek assistance after the fact—after daily lives have already been disrupted—rather than invest in high-quality cybersecurity services from the outset so as to prevent the breach from ever happening in the first place.

In fairness, the reactionary mentality permeates the discourse surrounding cybersecurity and it is easy to see why. When breaches are often framed in terms of how unforeseeable the most recent breach was and what is now being done in hindsight to foil a similar attack in the future, it is natural to think that, no matter what preventative measures a company takes, it is predetermined that breaches will happen regardless of how much they invest in cybersecurity technology. However, what this frame of mind fails to take into account is the contrasting ripple effects and big picture ramifications that absent or flawed cybersecurity tools have in comparison to strong, preventative cybersecurity measures.

The commonality that unites all the organizations that have had large-scale breaches, ranging from Wyndham Hotels, whose cybersecurity systems in place weren’t nearly up to par to Ashley Madison, who made false promises they couldn’t deliver on, is that they were vulnerable and not taking cybersecurity seriously enough. 

This sounds almost too obvious to address, but it is worth emphasizing: hackers are going to target companies with the weakest infrastructures in place. It makes their mission far more appealing and far more plausible when there are gaping holes to exploit. Infrastructure that is not adequately secured attracts the hackers to the target in the first place. On top of that, once a weak target is breached, it will be much harder to actually diagnose, pinpoint, and solve the problem because the cybersecurity originally in place was  inept at diagnosing and solving breaches.

Thus, the advantages to having a high-quality active and automated scanning system in place cannot be understated. Wyndham and Ashley Madison certainly didn’t have these measures in place and they both paid high prices. 

Even taking the New York Stock Exchange shut down last July into account emphasizes the necessity of automation this day and age. There is simply no room for human error in today’s world, especially with regard to cybersecurity. The shutdown was ruled not to be a breach but rather caused by engineers loading faulty software, but for hours a critical component of millions of Americans’ lives was shut down and no one could provide an answer. Had the NYSE shutdown been a result of a cybersecurity breach, every passing second without a clear diagnosis of the issue at hand would’ve been catastrophic. The situation could’ve grown exponentially worse and nobody but the hackers behind the attack would’ve been the wiser. 
 
It should not come as a surprise that manual initiatives will err at an exponentially greater rate than automated systems that are constantly performing preventative tests, making diagnoses, and remediating before a breach attempt has serious consequences that make normalization extortionate and nearly impossible. However, what does strike as surprising is that companies still often choose to willingly forego implementing preventative measures to the tune of large-scale breaches and excruciating consequences. 

In a study released earlier this month, 9 out of 10 corporate board members said that regulators should hold businesses liable for breaches if they haven't taken reasonable steps to secure customer data.[1] In other words, people are unwilling to give companies a pass when they do not make reasonable efforts to secure their data—this is now solidified as a bare minimum expectation. And it most assuredly should be considering personal livelihoods are often at stake. People “[want] the bad actors policed,” according to Chris Wysopal, CTO and CISO at Boston-based Veracode. The study also concluded that nearly 50% of respondents were influenced by the Wyndham Hotels case, and furthermore 60% of respondents anticipate that these breach-related lawsuits will continue to increase.[2]

To be expected, what continues to need to be defined as clearly as possible is what is considered to be “reasonable prevention measures.”The likes of Wyndham set the bar low with clearly incapable systems in place, but it still remains unclear where the line is going to be drawn. In addition, corporations and 90% of respondents to the survey have made it resoundingly clear that third-party software providers should be held liable when vulnerabilities are found in their packaged software.[3] According to Wysopal, this is not commonplace in the industry as third-party software providers are typically able to absolve themselves from liability in the published user license agreements, but according to the survey, “two-thirds of respondents said they have either begun or are planning to insert liability clauses into contracts with their third-party providers”.[4] Clearly accountability is what people and corporations alike desire, and as organizations demand more of it from software providers so as to please and protect their customers, qualified software providers willing to stand by their products and deliver results will surge at the expense of those that are unwilling to stand by their products out of fear of its shortcomings. Such a system rewards diligence at all levels of the cybersecurity spectrum.

Somebody needs to step up and set the bar--in more ways than one. Clearly, what we’ve believed to have been working isn’t working and there needs to be an innovative new approach to cybersecurity. System integration and automation are the first big steps to a brighter future. Furthermore, third-party software providers need to hold themselves responsible when breaches occur, and they need to modify their software accordingly. Rather than shirking responsibility and letting the corporations serve as scapegoats when people ask “what went wrong?,” it is time to own up to shortcomings, address them, and grow from them to prevent future cyber-attacks. 

Cybric’s Continuous Security Delivery Fabric is the solution that companies need. It is on the offensive—preventatively detecting and eliminating possible threats prior to them becoming a problem. It is automated, guiding, and time-efficient in stark contrast to approaches of the past that are manual, slow, and above all else, reactionary. If all you’re doing is reacting to a cybersecurity breach, then you’re already too late. It’s time to redefine the way that the world thinks about cybersecurity: we need to think about establishing ways to prevent attacks before they even materialize rather than picking up the pieces of a breached system that never stood a chance from the start. Cybric’s revolutionary offensive approach to cybersecurity is the foundation of a safer, more secure future. 

Investing in cybersecurity post-breach makes no sense when software that we stand by is available to keep your company safe and secure. In an age of uncertainty when breaches continue with regularity and punishments doled out to unprepared corporations are poised to grow stiffer, taking accountability and investing in the best product available suits the interests of everyone. Cybric’s orchestration fabric provides corporations with the safety net they need. In a time where cybersecurity resources are limited, quickly rendered irrelevant by a rapidly-evolving field, and becoming immensely important, Cybric provides a solution to help assuage the fear felt by corporations whose backs are tickled by the hot, rising flames of potential security breaches. Cybric’s goal is to offer these corporations a new alternative, to save these corporations before they get burned. 

At this pivotal juncture, cybersecurity has skyrocketed and become a top priority for businesses across the world. We’re faced, at this moment, with a choice. We can continue with more of the same, or we can forge ahead into this new frontier while taking ownership of our products. Together, we can remap the cybersecurity landscape and pave the road to a safer cyber-world. 



[1] http://www.csoonline.com/article/3001516/leadership-management/9-of-10-directors-support-regulator-action-on-cybersecurity.html
[2] http://www.csoonline.com/article/3001516/leadership-management/9-of-10-directors-support-regulator-action-on-cybersecurity.html
[3] http://www.csoonline.com/article/3001516/leadership-management/9-of-10-directors-support-regulator-action-on-cybersecurity.html
[4] http://www.csoonline.com/article/3001516/leadership-management/9-of-10-directors-support-regulator-action-on-cybersecurity.html
