---
layout: post
title: The Revived Powers of the FTC in Cybersecurity
date: 2015-09-19 00:13:42.000000000 -04:00
---
On August 24, 2015, a U.S. appellate court ruled that the Federal Trade Commission has the authority to sue Wyndham Hotels for allowing hackers to steal more than 600,000 customers’ data from its computer systems in 2008 and 2009, leading to more than $10 million in fraudulent charges. The ruling establishes a groundbreaking precedent in favor of the FTC, and most critically this should be deemed a victory for the consumer at large.

**The FTC Has Teeth**

Prior to this ruling, it was unclear whether the FTC was merely a watchdog in name or one that could lay down the hammer on companies who unfairly deceive their patrons. Well, last week’s decision legitimizes its previously ambiguous scope of power. After the FTC originally sued Wyndham in 2012, Wyndham appealed to a higher court, and the third circuit court has confirmed that this is exactly the sort of case that the FTC has the right to take action upon. As the court’s ruling reads quite emphatically, “A company does not act equitably when it publishes a privacy policy to attract customers who are concerned about data privacy, fails to make good on that promise by investing inadequate resources in cybersecurity, exposes its unsuspecting customers to substantial financial injury, and retains the profits of their business.”

**A Victory for the FTC, Of Course, But Perhaps an Even Greater Victory for the Consumer**

The FTC was the victor here in the direct sense, for if the third circuit court ruled against them then their cybersecurity prosecution powers would in effect have been rendered obsolete. But this is also a huge win for consumers. In the wake of the Ashley Madison hackers holding true to their threats and releasing the identities of millions who were under the pretense of confidentiality when signing up for the dating website, there has been very little to feel comfortable about from a consumer’s perspective. This is a step in the right direction. In the words of Electronic Privacy Information Center attorney Alan Butler, “…having the FTC out there, bringing actions against companies that fail to protect consumers’ data is a critical tool.” Simply put, companies now have a very real legal incentive to take cybersecurity seriously. Not only may they face consumer backlash, but they can now be assured that in instances when they fail to adequately protect their customers, the federal government can and will get involved, and they will potentially inflict steep punishment.

**Any Drawbacks Here?**

For what it’s worth, Wyndham won’t be backing down any plans to continue its case in the lower court. “We believe the facts will show the FTC’s allegations are unfounded,” reads a statement from Wyndham spokesperson Michael Valentino. And it should be noted that the third circuit court ruled on the FTC’s legitimacy exclusively rather than the actual allegations made against Wyndham. So, at this juncture presuming Wyndham’s guilt in this case specifically is likely short-sighted.

Valentino goes on to interestingly add the quip that, “…we believe consumers will be best served by the government and businesses working together collaboratively rather than as adversaries.” Herein lies what many Americans, small government conservatives and advocates of civil liberties may fear: a tilt too far in the favor of the public sector that undermines any guise of a system of checks and balances in regards to the matter of cybersecurity. Or, more in line with Valentino’s sentiments, a system in which the public and private sector clash like partisans unwilling to compromise and little gets accomplished.

**Where is the line?**

There is also a definite fear of over-regulation. With the boundaries of the FTC’s authority being relatively vague and mostly founded on a loose sense of what qualifies as passable protection of consumers’ information, businesses feel uncertain as to whether or not their security measures live up to the FTC’s standards. If a business can’t be sure of the standard their security must live up to, then is it really fair to punish them based on standards that they were never certain of in the first place? Standards that were never set in stone?

Some businesses are also concerned by the fact that the FTC’s power is based off of “decades-old laws that were not meant to address cybersecurity,”[1] raising the question of whether or not new, cybersecurity-specific laws and precedents need to be set in place. Cybersecurity is a new issue, and it is undoubtedly arguable that new issues require new legislation. However, on the other side of the issue, businesses misleading customers is far from an old issue, and whether or not the deception is based on cybersecurity or not, the standards are the same as always. This is the case regarding Wyndham hotels, as they falsely claimed to uphold certain safeguards (firewalls, encryption[2]), and very clearly deceived consumers. While the wrongdoings of Wyndham hotels may be pretty black and white, it has brought to light an issue that exists in a very grey area. What standard should these companies be held to as far as cybersecurity goes? What sort of measures should the FTC be authorized to take in response to hackings and cyberattacks? Without a clear-cut standard, there will be friction and tension, both of which will do nothing but hinder forward progress.

But again, the precedent is key here. This decision had to come down in the FTC’s favor or the FTC would essentially have no ability to police privacy and security abuse. An alternative ruling would have crippled the FTC, and in turn private companies would have the ability to run rampant should they choose to do so. However, the opposite outcome cannot stand either. If private companies cannot run rampant, then neither can the FTC. Responsible regulation of the FTC, clear-cut standards for companies to live up to, and cooperation between these two opposing sides are the only way that the issue of cybersecurity can be effectively addressed. What truly matters here is the safety of the consumer. People should be able to enter their information online without fear or hesitation, and the power to make this happen doesn’t lie solely with the FTC or solely with businesses--it is an outcome that can only be brought about in a collaborative manner.

**Enough is Enough**

If we take anything from this court ruling, it should be this: we can no longer pussyfoot around the issue of cybersecurity. Cut and dried standards and explicit unambiguous policies are a necessity, and the only way these can be settled is through both immediate and long term cooperation between the private and public sectors. Cybersecurity affects every single person online, and in this day and age that means pretty much everybody.

Take the recent IRS hack for example. We’re talking about a hack that occurred in May, and now months later we’re still not even certain of the scale of the attack. In May, it was reported that 114,000 taxpayers’ personal information was stolen, but then in August the number was revealed to be 334,000.[3] So essentially, for three months, the personal information of 220,000 accounts were hacked and nobody knew about it. That is unacceptable. There was an ineffective response to the first 114,000 accounts that were hacked, and that was barely over a third of the actual damage done. Why are people not jumping out of their chairs and working around the clock to rectify this? If businesses can be held accountable, why not government agencies? This just serves as yet another reminder that to call the issue of cybersecurity “big” would be a drastic understatement. We all are under its umbrella, businesses and government agencies alike.

The lack of action that’s been taken to solve this issue is egregious, especially considering that this is an issue we’re repeatedly reminded of by all the high-profile hacks that continue to occur. As we move further and further into the digital age, the new concerns that arise--cybersecurity being the most notable--need to be met with swift and effective regulation through policies, and the private and public sectors need to recognize that they’re on the same team and that the ball is in their court.

[1] http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/252217-court-rules-leads-to-fears-of-ftc-litigation-on-cybersecurity

[2]  http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/252217-court-rules-leads-to-fears-of-ftc-litigation-on-cybersecurity

[3] http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2015/08/17/irs-hack-get-transcript/31864171/
