---
layout: post
title: Where do the presidential candidates stand on cybersecurity?
date: 2016-02-29 12:43:45.000000000 -05:00
---
**Don’t expect them to tell us. We must ask.**

As the presidential primaries continue to heat up in preparation of Super Tuesday on March 1st wherein some clarity should finally be shed on the races, voters across the nation are likely scrutinizing the candidates’ qualifications closer than ever before. Tune into a stump speech or a debate and one can usually get a sense of a candidate’s stances on taxes, health care, immigration, national defense, and a plethora of other issues. Visit most candidates’ websites and these issues are analyzed in more depth: not only basic positions but proposals, voting records, and sometimes even the math behind how a candidate plans to pay for what they endorse. Pages of quality information are a mere few clicks of the mouse away.

But for months now one issue in particular is either skirted around by the candidates or simply never addressed at all: cybersecurity. Why is this the case? Well, there are a number of reasons. It isn’t a sexy topic for a candidate to hit out of the park in a neat little sound bite. The media rarely asks about it either because it does not make for riveting television, and thusly voters rarely think to hold candidates accountable for their positions. Media and voters alike are drawn to the horserace of presidential races, the reality television show that consumes all but one of the many suitors to occupy the White House, and as a result candidates get a free pass on an issue that is increasingly complex yet pertinent to the livelihoods of the citizens of the United States of America. 
The sheer fact of the matter is, regardless of whether candidates are prompted to discuss cybersecurity on the campaign trail, it is a priority that is here to stay and one that the government continues to inadequately address. As Major General Brett Williams, President of Operations at Ironnet Security, noted on NBC’s Meet the Press back in November in the wake of the OPM hacking carried out by China in which 21.5 million users’ records were compromised, “We’re past the wakeup call stage … we’re struggling to figure out how does this cyberactivity fit in with our element of national power”. 

And, not only does the more theoretical debate regarding the relationship between cybersecurity and the role of national government continue to linger on with little being solved, but the public and private sector alike often continue to refuse to be proactive. They only begrudgingly make changes in the aftermath of attacks.

“It’s poor risk assessment and a lack of will to do what needs to be done,” continues Major General Williams, “we continue to underestimate the probability we’ll be hacked and underestimate how bad it’s gonna be, we don’t spend the money that we have in the right place … I don’t see that really concerted effort”. 

Make no mistake, the next President of the United States will be jumping right into the fray of the shortcomings that the Major General addresses. And as David Thaw, a fellow of the Information Society Project at Yale Law School, points out, there is a beautifully cruel irony at play in the fact that the candidates are not asked to elaborate on their cybersecurity stances.

“They talk a lot about taxes in presidential campaigns,” Thaw notes, “I find that curious, because the president's role in tax policy has limits. Congress writes the tax code. The president, as a policymaker, plays a much bigger role in cybersecurity issues”. Keith Wagstaff at NBCNews confirms this fact: it is indeed the president that nominates heads of several agencies including the Department of Justice and the Department of Homeland Security which hold significant sway over how the Internet is regulated.  

In fairness to the candidates, if one looks closely, some have hinted at their perspectives on cybersecurity. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, the only remaining challenger to presumptive Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, unequivocally declared his opposition to the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA), a bill that would have encouraged private companies to voluntarily share information on cyberattacks with the government, on privacy grounds—chiefly the potential for abuse by the NSA. In this regard, Sanders sounds quite similar to civil liberties champion and former Presidential candidate Rand Paul. But it remains unclear where a President Sanders would exactly draw the line as he supported the Cybersecurity Act of 2012 which was opposed by privacy advocates—although advocates did make a note that Sanders fought for civil liberties to be accounted for in the bill.  

It appears Sanders is one of the only remaining contenders that has shown a willingness to openly grapple with some of these issues. But, although he has galvanized the political left in a way that few predicted, he remains a statistical longshot to surmount former Secretary Clinton. She has not taken a public position on CISA, and her statements on cybersecurity respect the importance of the issue but remain void of specificities.  
On the Republican side, frontrunner Donald Trump has been quoted as saying that the NSA should be given, “as much leeway as possible … as long as it doesn’t interfere with the Fourth Amendment”.  The presumptive establishment candidate of choice that the party is poised to coalesce around in the coming weeks, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, possesses a voting record that supported the government’s efforts to collective mass amounts of data in the name of national security. This drew extensive criticism from Paul in debates. Senator Ted Cruz likely occupies a place between the Sanders/Paul and Rubio sides of the issue, but again, like all the other candidates, he has not been pressed to address cybersecurity on the campaign trail with any large degree of specifics or nuance. 

Perhaps perfectly befitting, it was only Jeb Bush that devoted significant attention to cybersecurity on his website. The candidate that couldn’t appeal to anyone was the only candidate to espouse his thoughts on an issue that doesn’t appeal to anyone. Go figure. For what it’s worth, he favored CISA and giving federal agencies more access to data.  

As one can clearly see, this is a debate that doesn’t simply divide along partisan lines. Sanders and Paul are skeptical of the government’s role in cybersecurity as pertains to its dealings with the private sector. Rubio and Bush, on the other hand, are more sympathetic to federal data collection. Clinton, Cruz, and Trump might well fall somewhere in between—it’s hard to tell.

And this leads us to our conclusion: it shouldn’t be hard to tell where the candidates stand on cybersecurity! We should demand to hear a candidate’s thoughts on this vital matter. What role should the government be playing in data collection? What constitutes an act of war and what is our national response?  How do we hold the private sector accountable when they practice risky business at the expense of the average American’s civil liberties?

These all-encompassing questions sometimes sound too theoretical to the general public, too hypothetical, a talking point for a doomsday scenario but most assuredly a scenario that our nation won’t have to literally confront. But, pivotally, this line of thinking denies recent developments, denies cases that bear resemblance to the doomsday scenarios we consider impossible, denies reality.

In January, Ukraine’s power grids serving over 100 cities and over half a million people were infiltrated by malware with Russian origins. CNN’s Justice Reporter Evan Perez explains the ramifications. 

“For years, U.S. officials have expressed worry about the vulnerability of the U.S. power grid. And the U.S. investigation of the Ukrainian attack has confirmed what until now has been largely theoretical: that cyberwarfare can be used to disable the U.S. power grid”. A U.S. official later confirmed American systems aren’t any more protected than Ukraine’s. 
The widely respected Ted Koppel recently wrote a book entitled Lights Out: A Cyberattack, A Nation Unprepared, Surviving the Aftermath. In the book he explains that after conducting extensive research an attack on American power grids is not only possible but likely, and in an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper he discloses, “our power grid could not have been designed worse if our enemies had built it … the candidates need to be looking at it … we need to have a public discussion of what if anything the federal government can do”. 

And Williams and Koppel aren’t alone. Israeli Major General Aviv Kochavi went on record as saying, “cyber, in my modest opinion, will soon be revealed to be the biggest revolution in warfare, more than gunpowder and the utilization of air power in the last century”. And Kochavi is speaking with a firsthand perspective: Israel has been a leader in cyberwarfare—involved in both carrying out preemptive attacks on Iran’s contentious nuclear program and thwarting off attacks targeted at its own major navy base of Haifa in northern Israel. 

Cybersecurity is a huge issue and it pays everyone a disservice when we just refuse to acknowledge its scope. We should know where our job applicants stand. And we should demand they consult experts if cybersecurity is not exactly their area of expertise so as to allow them to develop a platform to present before the American people to cast judgment on at the ballot box.

Michael Fey, President and COO of Blue Coat, perhaps sums it up best. “With primary season here, skeptical voters would be doing the candidates—and the nation—a great service by demanding more thorough cyber platforms”.  It is in the best interests of everyone involved if questions are asked and concrete answers are given in response. 

A public seminar increases the public’s level of education and awareness on cybersecurity and frankly the candidate’s as well. We need to know how the candidates would act in a variety of situations pertaining to cyberwarfare and it can only be to their benefit if they know how they will react too. We can no longer continue to ignore the deadly elephant in the room. The continuance of concerted neglect fits Albert Einstein’s definition of insanity to a tee. 
 
        
